Blog on data & insights (1/11) (#4505)
pwa-builder/PWABuilder: apps/blog/src/posts/data-insights-on-PWAs/data-insights.md

backUrl: '/'
author:
  name: Amrutha Srinivasan
  title: PWABuilder Engineer
tags:
  - post
  - PWA
  - Insights
---

Every day, PWABuilder analyzes thousands of PWAs. We use this data to learn from you, the developers, about all the current trends in PWAs based on the kind of PWAs you create. In this article, we present some data and insights gathered from a 3-month snapshot of our analytics (Aug 2023 – Oct 2023). 
During this period, we recorded a total of 10,640 unique URLs that went through the flow of PWABuilder. That’s a PWA data mine right there! 
Manifests and service workers are the heart and soul of a PWA. They distinguish your PWA from being just another website. Manifests define how your PWA looks and behaves when installed on a device. Service workers are essentially JavaScript workers that run in the background and are used for features like notifications, offline support, background sync, and many more. They can also be used just to fetch data from APIs for the website or pretty much hold any logic that needs to run on the site.

## Service Worker Analysis

Out of the 10,640 PWAs, about 3940 of them had service workers that were detected by our site.
 

>  ![Alt text](/posts/data-insights-on-PWAs/appcap.png)

Reviewer: Make sure to write alt text for accessibility

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 ![Bar graph showing number of app capabilities used by Progressive Web Apps](/posts/data-insights-on-PWAs/appcap.png)
```

> What does this tell us? Well, for one thing, it shows that there is a lot of interest and potential in building PWAs, as evidenced by the large number of URLs that came to PWABuilder. However, it also reveals that there is a gap between the desire to create PWAs and the actual implementation of the core PWA features. Only about 37% of the PWAs had service workers, which means that  majority of them are missing out on the benefits of offline support, push notifications, background sync, and more. It is also a fair argument that not all PWAs need all of these features. Lately a lot of the major browsers have done away with mandating service workers for installability which could also mean developers see less value in building and maintaining service workers unless there is a business reason to use them.

Reviewer: Should we link to resources on how to implement a service worker or somewhere to read up on service workers?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What does this tell us? Well, for one thing, it shows that there is a lot of interest and potential in building PWAs, as evidenced by the large number of URLs that came to PWABuilder. However, it also reveals that there is a gap between the desire to create PWAs and the actual implementation of the core PWA features. Only about 37% of the PWAs had [service workers](https://docs.pwabuilder.com/#/home/sw-intro), which means that majority of them are missing out on the benefits of offline support, [push notifications](https://docs.pwabuilder.com/#/home/native-features?id=push-notifications), [background sync](https://docs.pwabuilder.com/#/home/native-features?id=background-sync), and more. It is also a fair argument that not all PWAs need all of these features. Lately a lot of the major browsers have done away with mandating service workers for installability which could also mean developers see less value in building and maintaining service workers unless there is a business reason to use them.
```

### Manifests and app capabilities

Manifests are a hard requirement for a PWA, unlike service workers. They hold a lot of crucial information that is needed for the PWA to behave more app-like such as icons, file handlers, link handlers and so much more. 

>  ![Alt text](/posts/data-insights-on-PWAs/SW.png)

Reviewer: Make sure to write alt text for accessibility

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 ![Pie chart showing the proportion of progressive web apps using service workers.](/posts/data-insights-on-PWAs/SW.png)
```

 * Share target:  A share target is a feature in a Progressive Web App (PWA) that allows the app to receive shared content from other apps. This is done by adding a share_target member to the web app manifest, which specifies how the app should handle shared data. It allows for seamless integreation of the PWA with the native sharing capabilities of the device. 
 * Shortcuts: Shortcuts in a Progressive Web App (PWA) allow users to quickly access specific features or pages within the app. These shortcuts can be added to the web app manifest and are displayed when a user long-presses or right-clicks on the app icon on their device.
 * Widgets: Widgets are small applications that can be embedded within a larger application or operating system. They are designed to provide quick access to frequently used information or functionality. In the context of an app manifest, widgets are defined in the PWA manifest file using the widgets manifest member.

## Insights from the data

> * It seems like  shortcuts are among the more popular features that developers like to use. Shortcuts are relatively easy to add, and are a quick way (or should a say, a shortcut), to add a feature that makes the PWA more app like.

Reviewer: I liked that you mentioned that shortcuts is easy to add but it also may be good to mention that features like widgets (below) or share_target require multiple steps and aren't as easy to add as well.

   
* The number of PWAs with widgets might seem low, but it was actually a surprise to me as widgets are relatively a newer feature. Earlier this year, Facebook was one of the first big PWAs to add widgets to their manifest. Widgets are an easy way to increase engagement across different surfaces on an operating system. The uptick in widgets is a positive indicator of increasing awareness among developers.

* There are many apps with detected protocol handlers, but upon a closer look, a large number of them were in fact empty arrays. It’s likely that the developers are using manifest templates that already contain protocol handlers but are not actually using them. 

## PWA Spotlight

> While digging through the data, I stumbled upon this [music player PWA](https://xamuzik.com/) that had almost all the app capabilities. It’s available on multiple app stores including the Microsoft Store. The UX feels very app-like, and uses a lot of app capabilities that are relevant for this app and offer a rich native experience. Shout out to the developers! We love finding apps like these that exemplify what good PWAs are and how well PWAs can be integrated with the operating system. 

Reviewer 2: I like the idea for this at the end, but it feels kinda tagged on at the end. A little more depth and maybe a screenshot might help.

Author: Yeah it started off as just a mention but became a whole paragraph..I don't want to put too much focus on it by adding more depth and stray away from the point of the blog. But I get what you're saying by "tagged on". I'll try to change it up a bit.

---
layout: post

> title: PWA Insights - A Look at PWABuilder Data

Reviewer 3: Consider changing to "Only X% of PWAs implement service workers - A quick review of the PWA ecosystem"

excerpt: A quick read on some insights derived from our  analytics on PWABuilder.com
description: This blog presents a snapshot of data from Aug - Oct 2023 of all the PWAs that have been through the flow of PWABuilder.com and what we can learn from them.
date: 2023-11-02
updatedDate: 2023-11-02
trending: true
featured: true
image: posts/data-insights-on-PWAs/titleimage.png
isPost: true
backUrl: '/'
author:
  name: Amrutha Srinivasan
  title: PWABuilder Engineer
tags:
  - post
  - PWA
  - Insights
---

> Every day, [PWABuilder](https://pwabuilder.com/) analyzes thousands of PWAs. We use this data to learn from you, the developers, about all the current trends in PWAs based on the kind of PWAs you create. In this article, we present some data and insights gathered from a 3-month snapshot of our analytics (Aug 2023 – Oct 2023). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Every day, [PWABuilder](https://pwabuilder.com/) analyzes thousands of PWAs. This gives us unique visibility about current trends in PWAs based on how developers use PWAs features. In this article, we present insights gathered from a 3-month snapshot of analyzed PWAs on PWABuilder.com (Aug 2023 – Oct 2023). 
```

During this period, we recorded a total of 10,640 unique URLs that went through the flow of PWABuilder. That’s a lot of Progressive Web Apps! 
Manifests and service workers are the heart and soul of a PWA. They distinguish your PWA from being just another website. Manifests define how your PWA looks and behaves when installed on a device. Service workers are essentially JavaScript workers that run in the background and are used for features like notifications, offline support, background sync, and many more. They can also be used just to fetch data from APIs for the website or pretty much hold any logic that needs to run on the site.

Learn more about [manifests](https://docs.pwabuilder.com/#/home/pwa-intro?id=web-app-manifests) and [service workers](https://docs.pwabuilder.com/#/home/sw-intro) from our documentation. 

## Service Worker Analysis

Out of the 10,640 PWAs, about 3940 of them had service workers that were detected by our site.
 

>  ![A graph of the number of PWAs that have each app capability enabled](/posts/data-insights-on-PWAs/appcap.png)

Reviewer 3: Should this image and the one below be swapped?

> What does this tell us? Well, for one thing, it shows that there is a lot of interest and potential in building PWAs, as evidenced by the large number of URLs that came to PWABuilder. However, it also reveals that there is a gap between the desire to create PWAs and the actual implementation of the core PWA features. Only about 37% of the PWAs had service workers, which means that  majority of them are missing out on the benefits of offline support, push notifications, background sync, and more. It is also a fair argument that not all PWAs need all of these features. Lately a lot of the major browsers have done away with mandating service workers for installability which could also mean developers see less value in building and maintaining service workers unless there is a business reason to use them.

Reviewer 3: @khmyznikov had done an analysis of how many service workers were empty service workers - is this something we can include here as well?

Reviewer 3: Also, do we have a breakdown of service worker features (offline, vs background sync we can share)?

Author: Offline was just added recently, there is no granular level data for service workers I can share here right now.

Author: > @khmyznikov had done an analysis of how many service workers were empty service workers - is this something we can include here as well?

I found that there were only 32 of them with no signs of logic (0.008%). If it was a higher number it would probably be more concerning and a valuable insight to provide. If you feel differently or can think of something I can add let me know.

### Manifests and app capabilities

> Manifests are a hard requirement for a PWA, unlike service workers. They hold a lot of crucial information that is needed for the PWA to behave more app-like such as icons, file handlers, link handlers and so much more. 

Reviewer 3: `hard requirement` sounds like it's hard to add. Consider changing to `While service workers are optional in a PWA, the web manifest is not`.

 ![A bar graph that shows the number of PWAs with and without service workers](/posts/data-insights-on-PWAs/SW.png)

>  We took 6 of the app capabilities into account to try and analyze how often they are being used in PWAs these days. A quick description of these:

Reviewer 3: How many of the URLs had a manifest? The URLs with manifest should be the baseline for the percentage calculations.

Author: We can't directly conclude which app has a manifest and doesn't just based on the Report card API. We probably should get this info from the FindWebManifest API. @khmyznikov thoughts?

Author: nevermind there's a way

>  * [File handlers](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/Manifest/file_handlers):  In a PWA, the file_handlers member specifies the types of files the PWA can handle. When installed, the browser uses this to associate the PWA with specific file types at the OS level.

Reviewer 3: Should include percentage in the graph or in the text compared to the urls with manifest

Author: Calculating as a percentage would result in very small numbers that are possibly not that informative. The analysis on this data was more relative to each other, like which of them is more popular than the other. So maybe a percentage is not really necessary here.

Author: Added percentages

 * [Widgets](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/progressive-web-apps-chromium/how-to/widgets): Widgets are small applications that can be embedded within a larger application or operating system. They are designed to provide quick access to frequently used information or functionality. In the context of an app manifest, widgets are defined in the PWA manifest file using the widgets manifest member.

## Insights from the data

* It seems like  shortcuts are among the more popular features that developers like to use. Shortcuts are relatively easy to add, and are a quick way (or should a say, a shortcut), to add a feature that makes the PWA more app like. On the other hand, features such as share_target, file_handlers and widgets require more work to enable and are also only relevant for certain scenarios so it's understandable why they are not as popular. 

> * The number of PWAs with widgets might seem low, but it was actually a surprise to me as widgets are relatively a newer feature. Earlier this year, Facebook was one of the first big PWAs to add widgets to their manifest. Widgets are an easy way to increase engagement across different surfaces on an operating system. The uptick in widgets is a positive indicator of increasing awareness among developers. 

Reviewer 3: Is Facebook implementing widgets public information? We should check to make sure

Author: They were featured at Build right? I'll ask around

Author: Got confirmation from facebook itself that they have no problems with being mentioned :)

* There are many apps with detected protocol handlers, but upon a closer look, a large number of them were in fact empty arrays. It’s likely that the developers are using manifest templates that already contain protocol handlers but are not actually using them. 

 
## Parting thoughts

From the data, it seems like developers are showing interest in adding app capabilities to improve the native-like experience of their PWA. As a developer, it's also important to understand and use these capabilities consciously only where it makes sense and avoid feature overload. Apps like [music player PWA](https://xamuzik.com/) are great examples of how to use app capabilities. This app has used many of the app capabilities, not only the ones listed above but others as well (handle_links, edge_side_panel, display_override). It's always great to find PWAs built by developers in the community that exemplify what a great app-like experience can be!

> While digging through the data, I stumbled upon this [music player PWA](https://xamuzik.com/) that had almost all the app capabilities. It’s available on multiple app stores including the Microsoft Store. The UX feels very app-like, and uses a lot of app capabilities that are relevant for this app and offer a rich native experience. Shout out to the developers! We love finding apps like these that exemplify what good PWAs are and how well PWAs can be integrated with the operating system. 

Reviewer 3: You mention this app twice, is that intended?

Reviewer 3: You can also end with asking folks to let us know what other data they's like to see in the future

Author: OOPS I thought I removed it good call out!

Author: > You can also end with asking folks to let us know what other data they's like to see in the future

Where can I ask them to reach out? Discord? Github?

Author: Discord makes more sense.
